  Publisher 


ENCYCLOPEDIA  BR1TANNICA,  INC. 


CHICAGO  -  LONDON  -  TORONTO 


BY  ARRANGEMENT  WITH  OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 


COPYRIGHT  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA,  1952, 
BY  ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,INC. 

COPYRIGHT  1952.   COPYRIGHT  UNDER  INTERNATIONAL  COPYRIG^ 
ENCYCLOP  *:DIA  BRITANNICA,  INC.   ALL  RIGHTS  RESERVED  UNDER 
COPYRIGHT  CONVENTIONS  BY  ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANJ^ 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 
LEO  TOLSTOY,  1828—1910 


COUNT  LEO  NIKOLAYEVICH  TOLSTOY  was  born 
August  28,  1828,  at  the  family  estate  of  Yasna- 
ya  Polyana,  in  the  province  of  Tula.  His  moth- 
er died  when  he  was  three  and  his  father  six 
years  later.  Placed  in  the  care  of  his  aunts,  he 
passed  many  of  his  early  years  at  Kazan,  where, 
in  1844,  after  a  preliminary  training  by  French 
tutors,  he  entered  the  university.  He  cared  lit- 
tle for  the  university  and  in  1847  withdrew  be- 
cause of  "ill-health  and  domestic  circum- 
stances." He  had,  however,  done  a  great  deal 
of  reading,  of  French,  English,  and  Russian 
novels,  the  New  Testament,  Voltaire,  and 
Hegel.  The  author  exercising  the  greatest  in- 
fluence upon  him  at  this  time  was  Rousseau; 
he  read  his  complete  works  and  for  sometime 
wore  about  his  neck  a  medallion  of  Rousseau. 

Immediately  upon  leaving  the  university, 
Tolstoy  returned  to  his  estate  and,  perhaps  inr 
spired  by  his  enthusiasm  for  Rousseau,  pre- 
pared to  devote  himself  to  agriculture  and  to 
improving  the  condition  of  his  serfs.  His  first 
attempt  at  social  reform  proved  disappointing, 
and  after  six  months  he  withdrew  to  Moscow 
and  St.  Petersburg,  where  he  gave  himself  over 
to  the  irregular  life  characteristic  of  his  class 
and  time.  In  1851,  determined  to  "escape  my 
debts  and,  more  than  anything  else,  my  hab- 
its," he  enlisted  in  the  Army  as  a  gentleman- 
volunteer,  and  went  to  the  Caucasus.  While  at 
Tiflis,  preparing  for  his  examinations  as  a 
cadet,  he  wrote  the  first  portion  of  the  trilogy, 
Childhood,  Boyhood,  and  Youth,  in  which  he 
celebrated  the  happiness  of  "being  with  Na- 
ture, seeing  her,  communing  with  her."  He  al- 
so began  The  Cossacks  with  the  intention  of 
showing  that  culture  is  the  enemy  of  happi- 
ness. Although  continuing  his  army  life,  he 
gradually  came  to  realize  that  "a  military  ca- 
reer is  not  for  me,  and  the  sooner  I  get  out  of 
it  and  devote  myself  entirely  to  literature  the 
better."  His  Sevastopol  Sketches  (1855)  were 
so  successful  that  Czar  Nicholas  issued  special 
orders  that  he  should  be  removed  from  a  post 
of  danger. 

Returning  to  St.  Petersburg,  Tolstoy  was  re- 
ceived with  great  favor  in  both  the  official  and 
literary  circles  of  the  capital.  He  soon  became 


interested  in  the  popular  progressive  move- 
ment of  the  time,  and  in  1857  he  decided  to  go 
abroad  and  study  the  educational  and  munici- 
pal systems  of  other  countries.  That  year,  and 
again  in  1860,  he  traveled  in  Europe.  At  Yas- 
naya  Polyana  in  1861  he  liberated  his  serfs  and 
opened  a  school,  established  on  the  principle 
that  "everything  which  savours  of  compulsion 
is  harmful."  He  started  a  magazine  to  promote 
his  notions  on  education  and  at  the  same  time 
served  as  an  official  arbitrator  for  grievances 
between  the  nobles  and  the  recently  emanci- 
pated serfs.  By  the  end  of  1863  he  was  so  ex- 
hausted that  he  discontinued  his  activities  and 
retired  to  the  steppes  to  drink  koumis  for  his 
health. 

Tolstoy  had  been  contemplating  marriage 
for  some  time,  and  in  1862  he  married  Sophie 
Behrs,  sixteen  years  his  junior,  and  the  daugh- 
ter of  a  fashionable  Moscow  doctor.  Their 
early  married  life  at  Yasnaya  Polyana  was 
tranquil.  Family  cares  occupied  the  Countess, 
and  in  the  course  of  her  life  she  bore  thirteen 
children,  nine  of  whom  survived  infancy.  Yet 
she  also  acted  as  a  copyist  for  her  husband, 
who  after  their  marriage  turned  again  to  writ- 
ing. He  was  soon  at  work  upon  "a  novel  of 
the  i8io's  and  *2o's"  which  absorbed  all  his 
time  and  effort.  He  went  frequently  to  Mos- 
cow, "studying  letters,  diaries,  and  traditions" 
and  "accumulated  a  whole  library"  of  histori- 
cal material  on  the  period.  He  interviewed 
survivors  of  the  battles  of  that  time  and  trav- 
eled to  Borodino  to  draw  up  a  map  of  the 
battleground.  Finally,  in  1869,  after  his  work 
had  undergone  several  changes  in  conception 
and  he  had  "spent  five  years  of  uninterrupted 
andjgxceptionally  strenuous  labor  Tnnierthe 
IbesfcondUtions  of  life/'  he  published  War  and 
Peace.  Its  appearance  immediately  established 
Tolstoy's  reputation,  and  in  the  judgment  of 
Turgenev,  the  acknowledged  dean  of  Russian 
letters,  gave  him  "first  place  among  all  our 
contemporary  writers." 

The  years  immediately  following  the  com- 
pletion of  War  and  Peace  were  pa**efl  in  a 
great  variety  of  occupations,  none  of  which 
Tohtoy  found  satisfying.  He  tried  busying 


