As  she  named  the  Empress,  Anna  Pdvlovna's 
face  suddenly  assumed  an  expression  of  pro- 
found and  sincere  devotion  and  respect  min- 
gled with  sadness, and  thisoccurred  every  time 
she  mentioned  her  illustrious  patroness.  She 
added  that  Her  Majesty  had  deigned  to  show 
Baron  Funke  beaucoup  d'estime,  and  again 
her  face  clouded  over  with  sadness. 

The  prince  was  silent  and  looked  indiffer- 
ent. But,  with  the  womanly  and  courtierlike 
quickness  and  tact  habitual  to  her,  Anna  Pdv- 
lovna wished  both  to  rebuke  him  (for  daring 
to  speak  as  he  had  done  of  a  man  recommended 
to  the  Empress)  and  at  the  same  time  to  con- 
sole him,  so  she  said: 

"Now  about  your  family.  Do  you  know  that 
since  your  daughter  came  out  everyone  has 
been  enraptured  by  her?  They  say  she  is  amaz- 
ingly beautiful." 

The  prince  bowed  to  signify  his  respect  and 
gratitude. 

"I  often  think,"  she  continued  after  a  short 
pause,  drawing  nearer  to  the  prince  and  smil- 
ing amiably  at  him  as  if  to  show  that  political 
and  social  topics  were  ended  and  the  time  had 
come  for  intimate  conversation— "I  often  think 
how  unfairly  sometimes  the  joys  of  life  are  dis- 
tributed. Why  has  fate  given  you  two  such 
splendid  children?  I  don't  speak  of  Anatole, 
your  youngest.  I  don't  like  him,"  she  added  in 
a  tone  admitting  of  no  rejoinder  and  raising 
her  eyebrows.  "Two  such  charming  children. 
And  really  you  appreciate  them  less  than  any- 
one, and  so  you  don't  deserve  to  have  them." 

And  she  smiled  her  ecstatic  smile. 

"I  can't  help  it,"  said  the  prince.  "Lavater 
would  have  said  I  lack  the  bump  of  paternity." 

"Don't  joke;  I  mean  to  have  a  serious  talk 
with  you.  Do  you  know  I  am  dissatisfied  with 
your  younger  son?  Between  ourselves"  (and 
her  face  assumed  its  melancholy  expression), 
"he  was  mentioned  at  Her  Majesty's  and  you 
were  pitied.  .  .  ." 

The   prince  answered   nothing,   but  she 


BOOK  ONE 


looked  at  him  significantly,  awaiting  a  reply. 
He  frowned. 

"What  would  you  have  me  do?"  he  said  at 
last.  "You  know  I  did  all  a  father  could  for 
their  education,  and  they  have  both  turned 
out  fools.  Hippolyte  is  at  least  a  quiet  fool,  but 
Anatole  is  an  active  one.  That  is  the  only  dif- 
ference between  them."  He  said  this  smiling 
in  a  way  more  natural  and  animated  than 
usual,  so  that  the  wrinkles  round  his  mouth 
very  clearly  revealed  something  unexpectedly 
coarse  and  unpleasant. 

"And  why  are  children  born  to  such  men  as 
you?  If  you  were  not  a  father  there  would  be 
nothing  I  could  reproach  you  with,"  said  Anna 
Pdvlovna,  looking  up  pensively. 

"I  am  your  faithful  slave  and  to  you  alone  I 
can  confess  that  my  children  are  the  bane  of 
my  life.  It  is  the  cross  I  have  to  bear.  That  is 
how  I  explain  it  to  myself.  It  can't  be  helped!" 

He  said  no  more,  but  expressed  his  resigna- 
tion to  cruel  fate  by  a  gesture.  Anna  Pdvlovna 
meditated. 

"Have  you  never  thought  of  marrying  your 
prodigal  son  Anatole?"  she  asked.  "They  say 
old  maids  have  a  mania  for  matchmaking,  and 
though  I  don't  feel  that  weakness  in  myself  as 
yet,  I  know  a  little  person  who  is  very  unhappy 
with  her  father.  She  is  a  relation  of  yours, 
Princess  Mary  Bolk6nskaya." 

Prince  Vasili  did  not  reply,  though,  with  the 
quickness  of  memory  and  perception  befitting 
a  man  of  the  world,  he  indicated  by  a  move- 
ment of  the  head  that  he  was  considering  this 
information. 

"Do  you  know,"  he  said  at  last,  evidently 
unable  to  check  the  sad  current  of  his  thoughts, 
"that  Anatole  is  costing  me  forty  thousand 
rubles  a  year?  And,"  he  went  on  after  a  pause, 
"what  will  it  be  in  five  years,  if  he  goes  on  like 
this?"  Presently  he  added:  "That's  what  we 

fathers  have  to  put  up  with Is  this  princess 

of  yours  rich?" 

"Her  father  is  very  rich  and  stingy.  He  lives 
in  the  country.  He  is  the  well-known  Prince 
Bolk6nski  who  had  to  retire  from  the  army  un- 
der the  late  Emperor,  and  was  nicknamed  'the 
King  of  Prussia.'  He  is  very  clever  but  eccen- 
tric, and  a  bore.  The  poor  girl  is  very  unhappy. 
She  has  a  brother;  I  think  you  know  him,  he 
married  Lise  Meinen  lately.  He  is  an  aide-de- 
camp of  Kutiizov's  and  will  be  here  tonight." 

"Listen,  dear  Annette,"  said  the  prince,  sud- 
denly taking  Anna  Pdvlovna's  hand  and  for 
some  reason  drawing  it  downwards.  "Arrange 
that  affair  for  me  and  I  shall  always  be  your 


most  devoted  slave— slaje  with  an  /,  as  a  village 
elder  of  mine  writes  in  his  reports.  She  is  rich 
and  of  good  family  and  that's  all  I  want." 

And  with  the  familiarity  and  easy  grace 
peculiar  to  him,  he  raised  the  maid  of  honor's 
hand  to  his  lips,  kissed  it,  and  swung  it  to  and 
fro  as  he  lay  back  in  his  armchair,  looking  in 
another  direction. 

"Attendee"  said  Anna  Pdvlovna,  reflecting, 
"I'll  speak  to  Lise,  young  Bolk6nski's  wife,  this 
very  evening,  and  perhaps  the  thing  can  be 
arranged.  It  shall  be  on  your  family's  behalf 
that  I'll  start  my  apprenticeship  as  old  maid." 

CHAPTER  II 

ANNA  PAVLOVNA'S  drawing  room  was  gradually 
filling.  The  highest  Petersburg  society  was  as- 
sembled there:  people  differing  widely  in  age 
and  character  but  alike  in  the  social  circle  to 
which  they  belonged.  Prince  Vasili's  daughter, 
the  beautiful  H£l£ne,  came  to  take  her  father 
to  the  ambassador's  entertainment;  she  wore  a 
ball  dress  and  her  badge  as  maid  of  honor.  The 
youthful  little  Princess  Bolkonskaya,  known 
as  la  femme  la  plus  sSduisante  de  Pfaersbourg? 
was  also  there.  She  had  been  married  during 
the  previous  winter,  and  being  pregnant  did 
not  go  to  any  large  gatherings,  but  only  to  small 
receptions.  Prince  Vasfli's  son,  Hippolyte,  had 
come  with  Mortemart,  whom  he  introduced. 
The  Abb6  Morio  and  many  others  had  also 
come. 

To  each  new  arrival  Anna  Pdvlovna  safcl, 
"You  have  not  yet  seen  my  aunt,"  or  "You  do 
not  know  my  aunt?"  and  very  gravely  con- 
ducted him  or  her  to  a  little  old  lady,  wearing 
large  bows  of  ribbon  in  her  cap,  who  had  come 
sailing  in  from  another  room  as  soon  as  the 
guests  began  to  arrive;  and  slowly  turning  her 
eyes  from  the  visitor  to  her  aunt,  Anna  Pdv- 
lovna mentioned  each  one's  name  and  then 
left  them. 

Each  visitor  performed  the  ceremony  of 
greeting  this  old  aunt  whom  not  one  of  them 
knew,  not  one  of  them  wanted  to  know,  and 
not  one  of  them  cared  about;  Anna  Pdvlovna 
observed  these  greetings  with  mournful  and  sol- 
emn interest  and  silent  approval.  The  aunt 
spoke  to  each  of  them  in  the  same  words,  about 
their  health  and  her  own,  and  the  health  of 
Her  Majesty,  "who,  thank  God,  was  better  to- 
day." And  each  visitor,  though  politeness  pre- 
vented his  showing  impatience,  left  the  old 
woman  with  a  sense  of  relief  at  having  per- 
formed a  vexatious  duty  and  did  not  return  to 

1  The  most  fascinating  woman  in  Petersburg. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


her  the  whole  evening. 

The  young  Princess  Bolk6nskaya  had 
brought  some  work  in  a  gold-embroidered  vel- 
vet bag.  Her  pretty  little  upper  lip,  on  which 
a  delicate  dark  down  was  just  perceptible,  was 
too  short  for  her  teeth,  but  it  lifted  all  the  more 
sweetly,  and  was  especially  charming  when  she 
occasionally  drew  it  down  to  meet  the  lower 
lip.  As  is  always  the  case  with  a  thoroughly  at- 
tractive woman,  her  defect—the  shortness  of 
her  upperlip  and  her  half-open  mouth— seemed 
to  be  her  own  special  and  peculiar  form  of 
beauty.  Everyone  brightened  at  the  sight  of 
this  pretty  young  woman,  so  soon  to  become 
a  mother,  so  full  of  life  and  health,  and  carry- 
ing her  burden  so  lightly.  Old  men  and  dull 
dispirited  young  ones  who  looked  at  her,  after 
being  in  her  company  and  talking  to  her  a 
litttle  while,  felt  as  if  they  too  were  becoming, 
like  her,  full  of  life  and  health.  All  who  talked 
to  her,  and  at  each  word  saw  her  bright  smile 
and  the  constant  gleam  of  her  white  teeth, 
thought  that  they  were  in  a  specially  amiable 
mood  that  day. 

The  little  princess  went  round  the  table 
with  quick,  short,  swaying  steps,  her  workbag 
on  her  arm,  and  gaily  spreading  out  her  dress 
sat  down  on  a  sofa  near  the  silver  samovar,  as 
if  all  she  was  doing  was  a  pleasure  to  herself 
and  to  all  around  her.  "I  have  brought  my 
work,"  said  she  in  French,  displaying  her  bag 
and  addressing  all  present.  "Mind,  Annette, 
I  hope  you  have  not  played  a  wicked  trick  on 
me,"  she  added,  turning  to  her  hostess.  "You 
wrote  that  it  was  to  be  quite  a  small  reception, 
and  just  see  how  badly  I  am  dressed."  And  she 
spread  out  her  arms  to  show  her  short-waisted, 
lace-trimmed,  dainty  gray  dress,  girdled  with 
a  broad  ribbon  just  below  the  breast. 

"Soyez  tranquille,  Lise,  you  will  always  be 
prettier  than  anyone  else,"  replied  Anna  Pdv- 
lovna. 
